Update metrics-collection to conform to style guide (#35746)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/metrics-collection.md

# Collect metrics

**This article applies to: ✔️** .NET Core 3.1 and later **✔️** .NET Framework 4.6.1 and later

> Instrumented code can record numeric measurements, but the measurements usually need to be aggregated, transmitted, and stored to create useful metrics for monitoring. This process of aggregating, transmitting, and storing the data is called collection. This tutorial shows several examples of collecting metrics:

Author: ```suggestion
Instrumented code can record numeric measurements, but the measurements usually need to be aggregated, transmitted, and stored to create useful metrics for monitoring. The process of aggregating, transmitting, and storing data is called collection. This tutorial shows several examples of collecting metrics:
```

- Populating metrics in [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) with [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) and [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/).
- Viewing metrics in real time with [`dotnet-counters`](/dotnet/core/diagnostics/dotnet-counters)
- Creating a custom collection tool using the underlying .NET <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> API.

> For more information about custom metric instrumentation and options, see [Compare metric APIs](compare-metric-apis.md).

Author: ```suggestion
For more information on custom metric instrumentation and options, see [Compare metric APIs](compare-metric-apis.md).
```

## View metrics with dotnet-counters

> [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) is a command-line tool that can view live metrics for any .NET Core app on demand. It doesn't require setup, making it useful for ad-hoc investigations or verifing that metric instrumentation is working. It works with both <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics?displayProperty=nameWithType> based APIs and [EventCounters](event-counters.md).

Author: ```suggestion
[dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) is a command-line tool that can view live metrics for .NET Core apps on demand. It doesn't require setup, making it useful for ad-hoc investigations or verifying that metric instrumentation is working. It works with both <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics?displayProperty=nameWithType> based APIs and [EventCounters](event-counters.md).
```

If the [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) tool isn't installed, run the following command:

```dotnetcli
dotnet tool update -g dotnet-counters
```

While the example app is running, list the running processes in a second shell to determine the process ID:

```dotnetcli
dotnet-counters ps
```

Output similar to the following is displayed:

```dotnetcli

>      10180 dotnet     C:\Program Files\dotnet\dotnet.exe
>      19964 metric-instr E:\temp\metric-instr\bin\Debug\netcoreapp3.1\metric-instr.exe

Author: ```suggestion
10180 dotnet     C:\Program Files\dotnet\dotnet.exe
19964 metric-instr E:\temp\metric-instr\bin\Debug\netcoreapp3.1\metric-instr.exe
```

```

> Find the ID for the process name that matches the example app and have `dotnet-counters` monitor all metrics from the "HatCo.HatStore" meter. The meter name is case-sensitive.

Author: ```suggestion
Find the ID for the process name that matches the example app and have `dotnet-counters` monitor all metrics from the `HatCo.HatStore` meter. The meter name is case-sensitive.
```

```dotnetcli
dotnet-counters monitor -p 19964 HatCo.HatStore
```

Output similar to the following is displayed:

```dotnetcli
Press p to pause, r to resume, q to quit.
    Status: Running

[HatCo.HatStore]
    hats-sold (Count / 1 sec)                          4
```

> `dotnet-counters` can be run specifying a different set of metrics to see some of the built-in instrumentation from the .NET runtime:

Author: ```suggestion
`dotnet-counters` can be run with a different set of metrics to see some of the built-in instrumentation from the .NET runtime:
```

    Working Set (MB)                                              30
```

For more information, see [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md). To learn more about metrics in .NET, see [built-in metrics](available-counters.md).

## View metrics in Grafana with OpenTelemetry and Prometheus

### Prerequisites

- [.NET Core 3.1 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet) or a later

### Overview

> [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is a vendor-neutral open-source project supported by the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/) that aims to standardize generating and collecting telemetry for cloud-native software. The .NET metric APIs are compatible with OpenTelemetry and make integration straightforward. [Azure Monitor](/azure/azure-monitor/app/opentelemetry-overview) and many major APM vendors have endorsed OpenTelemetry.

Author: ```suggestion
[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is a vendor-neutral open-source project supported by the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/) that seeks to standardize generating and collecting telemetry for cloud-native software. The .NET metric APIs are compatible with OpenTelemetry and make integration straightforward. [Azure Monitor](/azure/azure-monitor/app/opentelemetry-overview) and many major APM vendors have endorsed OpenTelemetry.
```

    Working Set (MB)                                              30
```

> For more information, see the [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md). To learn more about metrics in .NET, see [built-in metrics](available-counters.md).

Author: ```suggestion
For more information, see [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md). To learn more about metrics in .NET, see [built-in metrics](available-counters.md).
```

## View metrics in Grafana with OpenTelemetry and Prometheus

### Prerequisites

- [.NET Core 3.1 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet) or a later

### Overview

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is a vendor-neutral open-source project supported by the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/) that aims to standardize generating and collecting telemetry for cloud-native software. The .NET metric APIs are compatible with OpenTelemetry and make integration straightforward. [Azure Monitor](/azure/azure-monitor/app/opentelemetry-overview) and many major APM vendors have endorsed OpenTelemetry.

> This example shows one of the integrations available now for OpenTelemetry metrics using the popular OSS [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) projects. The metrics data flow:

Author: ```suggestion
This example shows one of the integrations available for OpenTelemetry metrics using the popular OSS [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) projects. The metrics data flow:
```

}
```

In the preceding code:

* `AddMeter("HatCo.HatStore")` configures OpenTelemetry to transmit all the metrics collected by the Meter our app defined.

> * `AddPrometheusExporter(...)` configures OpenTelemetry to expose Prometheus' metrics endpoint on port 9184 and to use the HttpListener. See the [OpenTelemetry documentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/docs/metrics/getting-started-prometheus-grafana#collect-metrics-using-prometheus)
> for more information about OpenTelemetry configuration options. The OpenTelemetry documentation shows hosting options for ASP.NET apps.

Author: ```suggestion
* `AddPrometheusExporter` configures OpenTelemetry to:
  * Expose Prometheus' metrics endpoint on port 9184
  * Use the HttpListener.

See the [OpenTelemetry documentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/docs/metrics/getting-started-prometheus-grafana#collect-metrics-using-prometheus) for more information about OpenTelemetry configuration options. The OpenTelemetry documentation shows hosting options for ASP.NET apps.
```

      - targets: ['localhost:9184']
```

> If you are starting from the default configuration, `scrape_configs` is similar to the followling YAML. Replace the ports in the following with your ports:

Author: ```suggestion
Using the default configuration, `scrape_configs` is similar to the following YAML. Replace the ports in the following with your ports:
```

      - targets: ['localhost:9184']
```

Reload the configuration or restart the Prometheus server, then confirm that OpenTelemetryTest is in the UP state in the **Status** > **Targets** page of the Prometheus web portal.

> On the Graph page of the Prometheus web portal, enter `hats_sold` in the expression text box. In the graph tab, Prometheus should show the steadily increasing value of the "hats-sold" Counter that is being emitted by our example application.

Author: ```suggestion
On the Graph page of the Prometheus web portal, enter `hats_sold` in the expression text box. In the graph tab, Prometheus shows the steadily increasing value of the "hats-sold" Counter that is being emitted by our example app.
```

[![Prometheus hats sold graph](media/prometheus-hat-sold-metric.png)](media/prometheus-hat-sold-metric.png)

> If the Prometheus server hasn't been scraping the example app for long, you may need to wait a short while for data to accumulate. You can adjust the time range control in the upper left to "1m" (1 minute) to get a better view of very recent data.

Author: ```suggestion
If the Prometheus server hasn't been scraping the example app for long, you may need to wait for data to accumulate. You can adjust the time range control in the upper left to "1m" (1 minute) to get a better view of recent data.
```

### Show metrics on a Grafana dashboard

1. Follow [the standard instructions](https://prometheus.io/docs/visualization/grafana/#creating-a-prometheus-graph) to install Grafana and connect it to a Prometheus data source.

> 2. Create a Grafana dashboard by clicking the **+** icon on the left toolbar in the Grafana web portal, then select **Dashboard**. In the dashboard
> editor that appears, enter 'Hats Sold/Sec' as the Title and 'rate(hats_sold[5m])' in the PromQL expression field. It should look like this:

Author: ```suggestion
2. Create a Grafana dashboard by clicking the **+** icon on the left toolbar in the Grafana web portal, then select **Dashboard**. In the dashboard editor that appears, enter 'Hats Sold/Sec' as the Title and 'rate(hats_sold[5m])' in the PromQL expression field. It should look like this:
```

}
```

> When run, the app now runs the custom callback on each measurement:

Author: ```suggestion
The app now runs the custom callback on each measurement:
```
